---
title: A dive into function evaluation strategies
tags:
    - programming
---

In all programming languages, one of the most important features that programmers often use are *functions* -- more generally known as a **subroutine**, it refers to a sequence of instructions packaged together as a unit to perform a specific task. The unit can then be used in multiple places in the program, wherever a task needs to be performed.

In this article, I'm going to be explaining function evaluation strategies -- the inner workings of *how* programming languages make sense of and work with the functions that you write. I assume basic familiarity with functions and OOP -- if not, I suggest that you check out my other articles.

I also assume basic familiarity with Python and C. I have demonstrated examples from various other programming languages but knowledge of the same is not necessary to understand this article -- a basic understanding of how programming works will suffice, the syntax should be readable enough. Let's get into it!

---

Before we dive into evaluation strategies, let me introduce some terminology specific to functions.

A **parameter** is a special variable that is used as a placeholder to denote the data that will be provided as input to the function. The **arguments** are the actual data values that are passed to the function. To take an example:

```c
int add(int a, int b){
    int sum = a + b;
    return sum
}

int s = add(5, 6)
```

An example of a very simple function to add two numbers in C.

In the above example the *parameters* are `a` and `b`, and the *arguments* for the function call are 5 and 6.

So then, what *is* an evaluation strategy?

An evaluation strategy is something that every programming language must use to determine two things:

1. **when** to evaluate the arguments of a function call;
2. **what** kind of value to pass to the function.

There are several specialised ways the combination of the above two can be implemented, but in general, the two most common strategies are **strict** and **non-strict** evaluation.

# Strict Evaluation

In strict evaluation, the arguments to a function are always *completely* evaluated before the function is applied. Almost all imperative programming languages implement eager evaluation. The reason for this is that the order of execution in imperative programming languages is implicitly described by the source code i.e. only after the first line executes, the second line will execute and so on. There are some unexpected behaviours that can be observed when code is executed out of order -- including bugs and effects that can be hard to detect and control.

An example of eager evaluation can be observed below, in Python:

```python
def hello(a, pi = 6 < "seven"):
    print("The value of a is", a)

x = 9
```

A function `hello` with a compulsory parameter `a` and a non-compulsory parameter `pi` which, when evaluated, throws a `TypeError` -- comparisons between strings and integers are not supported in Python.

In the above example, even though the value of pi is never used by the function, when `hello` is called, the function throws a `TypeError`. This demonstrates how eager evaluation works -- all arguments are evaluated and bound to their respective parameters before the function is executed.

While many modern compilers for languages optimise resources by re-ordering execution to some extent, the flow of the program **must** ultimately follow the evaluation strategy that the programming language the compiled code is written in follows. In fact, to avoid any problems that such optimisations might cause, many modern high-level programming languages offer the programmer to direct the compiler with regards to which optimisations to make.

There are several commonly used implementations of eager evaluation:

## Call by Value

Call by value, or pass by value, is the most common evaluation strategy that languages like C or Pascal use. In this, the argument expression is evaluated and the value is bound to the corresponding local variable in the function. Anything passed into a function call is unchanged in the caller's scope (i.e. the scope from which the function is being called) when the function returns.

```c
void modify(int x, int y){
    x += 1;
    y += 2;
}

int main(void){
    int a = 5;
    int b = 6;
    modify(a, b);
    printf("%d %d", a, b);
}
```

The output of the above program is `5 6` -- since C implements call by value, only the local variables are changed inside the function `modify` and thus when the function exits, no changes have occured to the global variables `a` and `b`.

There are some limitations to this description of call by value -- in C, for example, an array is a data structure, but when passed into a function an array "decays" into the pointer to its first element. In such cases, it can sometimes be difficult to predict the results of programs since certain functions may produce outputs that look similar to call by reference or call by sharing. There are various subtleties to the implementations of these strategies, but we will not get into those -- for the *most* part, it suffices to say that C evaluates functions using call by value.

## Call by Reference

Call by reference, or pass by reference, is when a function receives an *implicit reference* to a variable used as an argument. What does this mean? A **reference** is some way by which a variable's value can be indirectly accessed and modified. This means that any variables passed into a function can be modified by it if they are passed by reference -- something that makes it difficult for programmers to keep track of the effects of a function call during program analysis.

One of the simplest tests for whether a programming language supports call by reference is to check whether a **swapping function** i.e. `swap(a, b)` can be written in it. This kind of function takes two variables `a` and `b` and exchanges their values. If such a function *can* be written in the program, then it supports call by reference -- otherwise, it does not.

Very few languages offer call by reference as default, but languages like C++, Visual Basic, PHP and C# offer special syntax to use call by reference. In other languages such as C and Rust, which evaluate using call by value, call by reference can be simulated using pointers -- references to the memory address of a specific variable. The trick here is that while the value passed into the function i.e. the pointer itself cannot be changed since it is call by value, the value that the pointer refers to is under no such limitations and thus can be accessed and changed.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

void modify(int x, int *y){
    x += 1;
    *y += 2;
}

int main(void){
    int a = 5;
    int b = 6;
    modify(a, &b);
    printf("%d %d", a, b);
}
```

Nearly the same example as before, but with a twist -- here, while `a` is being passed into the function as a simple variable, in the case of `b` we are passing the pointer to the variable. The function too is designed to access the value that the pointer refers to, and modify it. The output is thus `5 8`. Note that while this simulates call by reference, strictly speaking it is still very much call by value -- the value that got passed into the function, the pointer, is not modified.

## Call by Sharing

Call by sharing, or call by object sharing, is a strategy that is used by languages like Python, Java, Ruby, and many others. In this strategy, a reference to an object is passed into a function whenever an object is given as an argument to a function.

Let me demonstrate with an example. In Python, lists are mutable objects:

```python
def f(a_list):
    a_list.append(1)

m = []
f(m)
print(m)
```

Since Python lists are mutable, the output of the above program is `[1]`.

An important thing to note in these languages is that the reference passed into the function is to the *object* that the argument is bound to, and not the variable. Confused? Think of it like a suitcase with a label on it. The label is the variable, and the suitcase is the object. When you pass an object to a function in call by sharing languages, you are essentially passing the keys to the suitcase, but the label is stuck firmly on -- you don't have permission to change the suitcase's name (no one wants to see a variable change names just because it can -- or we'd be dealing with names like `funky_rockstar` and `magical_metal` referring to the same object 😂)

When you pass a mutable object into a function, you get the keys to the suitcse, so this means that you can change what's inside of the suitcase. However, once initialised, a variable will continue to refer to a certain object unless explicitly modified in the scope that it was initialised in.

If you *initialise* a variable inside a function, that's like creating a new suitcase with a new label. In these cases, a local variable is created that points to a completely new object (a new suitcase, if you will). Even if the name of the variable happens to be the same as one that got shared with the function call, a local variable and a new object are created, and so the global object is left unchanged. (You decide to be cheeky and label your suitcase the same as your mum's, but if you try to mess around with your mum's suitcase hoping that the names will confuse her, she's too good for that 😉)

```python
def f(a_list):
    a_list = [1]

m = []
f(m)
print(m)
```

The assignment leads to the creation of a local variable <code>a_list</code> that shadows the global one, and hence the output for the above program is simply <code>[]</code>.

---

# Non-Strict Evaluation

In non-strict evaluation, arguments to a function are not evaluated unless they are actually used in the evaluation of the function body. This is a *very* generic statement, and so I'm going to dive right into the various types of non-strict evaluation so that you can understand this better with the help of examples:

## Short-Circuit Evaluation

Short-circuit evaluation is a feature of certain Boolean operators in some programming languages where the second argument is evaluated only if the first argument does not provide a conclusive result for the value of the overall expression. For example, if the first argument of an `AND` expression evaluates to `false`, then the overall expression *must* be `false`. If the first argument of an `OR` expression evaluates to `true`, then the overall expression *must* be `true`. (The above two statements can be easily verified using a truth table.)

Short-circuit operators act more like control flow structures than simple operators. For example, the short-circuit `x AND y` reduces to `if x then y else x`; the short-circuit `x OR y` reduces to `if x then x else y`. The above definition is applicable to languages which are not strictly typed like Python or Julia, where the return value of the Boolean expression may be non-Boolean. This may be confusing, but an example should clear it up.

```julia
julia> true & "hello"
ERROR: MethodError: no method matching &(::Bool, ::String)
Closest candidates are:
  &(::Any, ::Any, ::Any, ::Any...) at operators.jl:560
  &(::Bool, ::Bool) at bool.jl:36
  &(::Bool, ::Missing) at missing.jl:161
  ...
Stacktrace:
 [1] top-level scope
   @ REPL[1]:1

julia> true && "hello"
"hello"
```

Julia offers both short-circuit and non-short-circuit boolean operators. In the first case, the regular `AND`, a cryptic error message returns that basically says that the operator `&` doesn't have a method for a boolean and a string value. In the second case, since the `&&` operator is short-circuit, the rule `if x then y else x` comes into effect. Since `x` is `true`, the return value is `y`, which in this case happens to be `\"hello\"`.

In strictly typed languages like Rust, short-circuit `x AND y` becomes `if x then y else false`, and short-circuit `x OR y` becomes `if x then true else y`.

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = false || true; // true
    let y = false && panic!(); // false, doesn't evaluate `panic!()`
}
```

An example stolen from the [Rust reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#lazy-boolean-operators) to demonstrate short-circuit operators in Rust. Rust too offers non-short-circuiting variants of `AND` and `OR`, although I've chosen to omit examples demonstrating them for the sake of brevity.

## Call by Need

Call by Need (alternatively, **lazy evaluation**) is a variant of non-strict evaluation where the function argument is evaluated only if needed. Once evaluated, that value is stored for subsequent use. Again, very technical, so let me demonstrate with an example. The code below is written in R, but even for those who don't know anything about R, the syntax and structure should look familiar:

```r
mean_of_that <- function(x, mean_of = mean(x)){
  x <- x[!is.na(x)] # removes all instances of NA from x
  print(x)
  cat("The mean of x is", mean_of)
}
mean_of_that(c(1,2,3,4,NA))

## [1] 1 2 3 4
## The mean of x is 2.5
```

An example to demonstrate lazy evaluation in R.

`NA` is R's "missing value" data type -- for understanding, you can assume it to be similar to Python's `None`. Now, if R were eagerly evaluated, `mean_of` would have been evaluated when the function was called in the first place -- in such a case, the result would have been `NA` (the mean of any data with `NA` returns `NA`.) However, since R is lazily evaluated, first x is modified to strip it of `NA` values and only then is `mean_of` evaluated, resulting in the answer being the mean of 1, 2, 3 and 4, or 2.5.

Python uses a type of lazy evaluation as well, for `range` objects. Unlike a list, this does not store all the numbers in the given range in memory -- instead, it *yields* the numbers when iterated over or indexed into. Elements of the range object are only generated when they are needed -- an example of lazy evaluation.

```python
>>> r = range(10)
>>> print(r)
range(0, 10)
>>> print(r[3])
3
```

Range objects in Python -- note that printing the object does not result in all the numbers being printed, but on indexing into the object we can obtain the desired number.

Lazy evaluation is implemented by default in most functional programming languages like Haskell.

# Conclusion

Firstly, thank you once again for making it to the end! I try to keep my articles light but when dealing with technical topics as this, some jargon tends to creep in so I hope that it wasn't too boring. As always, comments are appreciated. This post was not intended to be a comprehensive coverage of evaluation strategies by any means, but I have tried to give you an overview of the most commonly used ones. More specific implementations are mostly language-dependent, so you can explore those based on whichever language you're learning at the moment.

In the next article, I take a quick walk through JIT compilers, and why an increasing number of modern programming languages have been using them. Until next time!

---

_Thanks for reading! I hope you’ve enjoyed reading this article._